It was the year 1935 Einstein's debate with Barr saw the letter emerge as the winner.
Yet Einstein did not give up in a famous paper entitled Can Quantum Mechanical Description of Physical
Reality Be Considered Complete?
Albert Einstein, Boris Podolsky and Nathan Rosen, they're from the acronym EPSA, proposed an interesting
thought experiment which was supposed to show why quantum mechanics cannot be complete after all.
As so, at least their argument to end it inherently contains a statement which denies physical reality.
If by physical reality we mean any physical quantity that can in principle be determined with certainty.
To show what they felt was inconsistent with the present formulation of quantum mechanics, Epper Cho's
position, momentum complimentarity, we know that if we precisely measure the position of a particle,
we will lose information about its momentum and vice versa.
If we measure its momentum, we can no longer say something precise about its position, not because
of an interaction between the measurement device and the particle, but because of a fundamental inherent
indefiniteness of these quantities intrinsically in themselves.
That's Heisenberg's uncertainty principle that I hope you know, and now by now, you grasp this important
distinction.
So what was the EPRI argument, which so they believed shows that there is a possibility of overcoming
this limitation?
If you understand the real meaning of the complementarity between position and momentum expressed by
the commutation relation, it is easy to understand what they had in mind by using the following measuring
scheme applied to a system of entangled particles.
Suppose we have a source which we assume to be addressed relative to our laboratory that produces by
a nuclear nuclear decay process, for example, two entangled particles which fly apart into two different
and opposite directions, like the figure here.
Then, according to our standard, an intuitive understanding of Newtonian dynamics, which, as everyone
knows, implies the conservation of energy and momentum, we should think of each particle as having
the same, but contrary momentum.
That is P for particle A and minus P for particle B.
Now measure the position of position X of one particle, say particle A, for example, by inserting
a tiny pinhole in its path or whatever, but without making any attempt to gain information about its
momentum.
P Because we know according to quantum mechanics we have, we are not allowed to know the position and
momentum at the same time, because otherwise once we measure the momentum, we will destroy the information
over its position again.
So we perform only one position measurement on Particle A and get the measurement result X.
With this information, we should have also established the position of particle B, at least according
to our common sense, as it was ejected from the source at the same time and with the same momentum
that means the same velocity in the opposite direction.
Therefore, at the time of the measurement, the position of particle B must have been minus X, we
can deduce this without any measurement, simply by an inference which relies only on the assumption
that the conservation of energy and momentum holds.
The interesting point is that because so far no measurement on Particle B has been made, quantum mechanics
allows us to make a second measurement.
The measurement of the momentum of the second particle.
B.
Measuring momenta is somewhat more complicated from a practical point of view, but not not impossible
in principle, as long as we make the second measurement on the second particle B, quantum mechanics
has no objections now.
By doing that, we have the momentum minus P of particle B.
And again, for the conservation laws, we deduce from that without any measurement that the momentum
of a particle A must have been P.
Therefore, by this thought experiment, we can, at least in principle, retrieve the position X and
momentum P of Particle A and also the position minus X and momentum minus P of particle B without having
to measure both position and momentum on the same particle.
And this apparently having deceived nature, so to speak, which imposes the connotation relation on
these observables, stating the impossibility of knowing them both, not even in principle.
Note that because the position of A and the momentum of B have been inferred mentally by deduction,
not from a measurement, the implication is that if nature nevertheless maintains Heisenberg's principle
as valid, the uncertainty cannot arise due to the perturbation or disturbance of the system for the
simple reason that no measurement of P on A minus X on B has occurred in the first place.
This also means that if the particles, positions and momentum are really definite, as Epper argue,
then the wave function and all the other Jabri construct describing a quantum system, lack of the complete
information since it allows only for one or the other dynamic variable to be to be determined according
to Heisenberg's uncertainty principle and the commutation relations.
So by this simple reasoning, EPR concluded as follows, if without any way disturbing a system, we
can predict with certainty that is with probability equal to unity, the value of a of a physical quantity,
then there exists an element of physical reality corresponding to this physical quantity.
Later on, they also write, while we have thus shown that the wavefunction does not provide a complete
description of the physical reality, we left open the question of whether or not such a description
exists.
We believe, however, that such a theory is possible.
We can sum this up by stating also the following is the condition for the reality of a physical quantity
is the possibility of predicting it with certainty without disturbing the system.
Then first, the description of reality given, by the way, function in quantum mechanics is not complete.
Or second, second possibility, these two quantities, X and P, cannot have simultaneous reality.
This is known as the EPR paradox, the paradox is not in the logic or the math, but in what this logic
suggests.
In contrast to our physical, macroscopic, everyday experience, nature seems to opt for the second
possibility, with quantum mechanics complete, contrary to any form of realism to which we are accustomed.
Moreover, Epper argued that if quantum mechanics is a complete theory, this must imply a causality
violation in the relativistic sense, there can be causes and effects which arise apparently due to
an interaction faster than the speed of light.
This is because if one measures the position of a particle A and by doing so discovers that this instantly
causes an uncertainty over the momentum of Particle B as Heisenberg's Uncertainty Principle requests.
Even if it is light years away, then this looks like an interaction at a distance that is aluminum
in the same manner we already saw in the previous section with quantum entanglement.
Because relativity was already an experimental test in accepted theory, in EPA's view, therefore,
quantum mechanics had to be modified.
It could at best be considered only a provisional theory and not a complete theory.
This because if quantum mechanics imposes the noncommitted ability of operators as a fundamental principle,
a thought experiment like that which are proposed should not be allowed to circumvent it.
What Epper were looking for was a local theory that is a theory that does not need apparently instant
super luminal correlations over long distances and that does not deal with intrinsically undetermined
states.
They were looking for a theory which would reveal how quantum mechanics in its present form must be
incomplete and which ultimately explained facts in terms of predetermined and well-defined states,
as in Newtonian mechanics or relativity, and which rested on the assumption that hidden variables exists
that rule the phenomenon, even if they have yet to be found.
In this thought experiment, the predetermination they were seeking was some mechanism, some still
unknown process, which poses the two particles into an opposite spin state at the time of their creation
already at the source.
And that could dispense with the requirement of any annoying faster than light correlation.
EPA were apparently able to show that the principle of complementarity expressed by computational relations
seems to be a form of mathematical abstraction, but cannot describe how things are really objectively
out there, so to speak.
Physical objects must ultimately have intrinsically definite properties, even if, for whatever reason,
we can't measure them directly.
That is, EPR tried hard to reintroduce counterfactual definiteness into the physical picture in the
EPR thought experiment.
One deduces properties such as the position of particle B in the momentum of particle A, not measuring
it by a retroactive reasoning that assumes more or less implicitly, that particles inherently have
a position and momentum even if we are not able to know them.
Quantum mechanics, however, seems to shed serious doubt on that.
The question at this point is where Epper really right?
Is quantum mechanics an incomplete theory, after all?
Where are they finally successful in finding a loophole in quantum mechanics that shows its incompleteness?
We will answer these questions, however, before let us also review the EPR thought experiment itself
in its modern version, since this is the experimental setup that nowadays physicists work with.